Add Zombienet tutorial (#12)
papermoonio/polkadot-ecosystem-docs-draft: docs/dev-tools/zombienet/tutorials/minimal-example.md

---
title: Minimal Example of the usage of Zombienet
description: This tutorial provides an example of how to use Zombienet to spawn a basic network and run a simple test over it.
---

> # A Minimal Example of the usage of Zombienet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# A Minimal Example of the Usage of Zombienet
```

This tutorial provides an example of how to use Zombienet to spawn a basic network and run a simple test against it.

## Prerequisites

> To follow this tutorial, first, you need to have Zombienet installed. If you haven't done so, please follow the instructions in the [Zombienet installation section](../overview.md/#installation).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To follow this tutorial, first, you need to have Zombienet installed. If you haven't done so, please follow the instructions in the [Zombienet installation section](../overview.md/#installation){target=_blank}.
```

> ## Defining the network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Defining the Network
```

> As mentioned in the [Configuration Files section](../overview.md/#configuration-files), Zombienet uses a configuration file to define the ephemeral network that will be spawned. To follow this tutorial, you can create a file named `minimal-example.toml` with the following content:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned in the [Configuration Files section](../overview.md/#configuration-files){target=_blank}, Zombienet uses a configuration file to define the ephemeral network that will be spawned. To follow this tutorial, create a file named `minimal-example.toml` with the following content:
```

> ```toml

Author: Marking this item as solved since it will be resolved when those folders are merged into the main branch. It will be addressed at https://opslayer.atlassian.net/browse/DRP-40

[settings]
timeout = 120

[relaychain]

[[relaychain.nodes]]
name = "alice"
validator = true

[[relaychain.nodes]]
name = "bob"
validator = true

[[parachains]]
id = 100

  [parachains.collator]
  name = "collator01
```

This configuration file defines a network with a relaychain with two nodes, `alice` and `bob`, and a parachain with a collator named `collator01`. Also, it sets a timeout of 120 seconds for the network to be ready.

## Running the network

To spawn the network, run the following command:

```bash
zombienet -p native spawn minimal-example.toml
```

This command will spawn the network defined in the `minimal-example.toml` configuration file. The `-p native` flag specifies that the network will be spawned using the native runtime.

If successful, you will see the following output:

> <div id="termynal" data-termynal>

Author: Marking this item as solved since it will be resolved when those folders are merged into the main branch. It will be addressed at https://opslayer.atlassian.net/browse/DRP-40

        </tr>
            <tr>
                <th colspan="3" align="center">
                Node Information
                </th>
            </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>Name</th>
            <td>collator01</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>Direct Link</th>
            <td><a href="https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=ws://127.0.0.1:55316#explorer">https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=ws://127.0.0.1:55316#explorer</a></td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>Prometheus Link</th>
            <td><a href="http://127.0.0.1:55318/metrics">http://127.0.0.1:55318/metrics</a></td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>Log Cmd</th>
            <td>tail -f /var/folders/f4/7rdt2m9d7j361dm453cpggbm0000gn/T/zombie-75a01b93c92d571f6198a67bcb380fcd_21724-2</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>Parachain ID</th>
            <td>100</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>ChainSpec Path</th>
            <td>/var/folders/f4/7rdt2m9d7j361dm453cpggbm0000gn/T/zombie-75a01b93c92d571f6198a67bcb380fcd_21724-2</td>
        </tr>
    </table>
</div>

!!! note 

>     If the IPs and ports are not explicitly defined in the configuration file, they may change each time the network is started, causing the links provided in the output to differ from the example.

Reviewer 2: IPs can also change? Or only the ports?

Author: Yes, you can use the keyword `local_ip` in the settings section of the config file. The default is `127.0.0.1`, but it can be changed to any other IP used to expose local services (RPC/metrics/monitors).

> ## Interacting with the spawned network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Interacting with the Spawned Network
```

> ### Connecting to the nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Connecting to the Nodes
```

After the network is launched, you can interact with it using the [Polkadot.js App](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/){target=_blank}. To do so, open your browser and use the provided links listed by the output as 'direct link'. For instance, in this particular case, as the ports may vary from spawning to spawning, to interact with the `alice` node, open [https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=ws://127.0.0.1:55308#explorer](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=ws://127.0.0.1:55308#explorer){target=_blank} as it is the link provided in the output for the `alice` node. Moreover, you can also do this for the `bob` and `collator01` nodes.

If you want to interact with the nodes more programmatically, you can also use the [Polkadot.js API](https://polkadot.js.org/api/){target=_blank}. For example, the following code snippet shows how to connect to the `alice` node using the Polkadot.js API and log some information about the chain and node:

> ```typescript

Author: Marking this item as solved since it will be resolved when those folders are merged into the main branch. It will be addressed at https://opslayer.atlassian.net/browse/DRP-40

> ```typescript

Reviewer 3: @nhussein11 - when you move these to code snippets, please make sure you run prettier

import { ApiPromise, WsProvider } from '@polkadot/api';

async function main() {
  const wsProvider = new WsProvider('ws://127.0.0.1:55308');
    const api = await ApiPromise.create({ provider: wsProvider });

    // Retrieve the chain & node information via rpc calls
    const [chain, nodeName, nodeVersion] = await Promise.all([
        api.rpc.system.chain(),
        api.rpc.system.name(),
        api.rpc.system.version()
    ]);

    console.log(`You are connected to chain ${chain} using ${nodeName} v${nodeVersion}`);
}

main().catch(console.error).finally(() => process.exit());
```

Either way allows you to interact easily with the network and its nodes.

> ### Checking metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Checking Metrics
```

You can also check the metrics of the nodes by accessing the provided links listed by the output as 'Prometheus Link'. [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/){target=_blank} is a monitoring and alerting toolkit that collects metrics from the nodes. By accessing the provided links, you can see the metrics of the nodes in a web interface.

> TODO: add a screenshot of the metrics page

Reviewer: Have you taken the screenshot yet?

### Checking logs

To check the nodes’ logs, you can use the provided command listed by the output as 'Log Cmd'. For instance, to check the logs of the `alice` node, you can open a new terminal and run the following command:

```bash
tail -f /var/folders/f4/7rdt2m9d7j361dm453cpggbm0000gn/T/zombie-75a01b93c92d571f6198a67bcb380fcd_21724-SEzfCidQ1za4/alice.log
```

After running this command, you will see the logs of the `alice` node in real-time, which can be useful for debugging purposes. The logs of the `bob` and `collator01` nodes can be checked similarly.

> ## Running a test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Running a Test
```

To run a test against the spawned network, you can use the [Zombienet DSL](../testing.md) to define the test scenario. For example, you can create a file named `minimal-example-test.zndsl` with the following content:

> ```toml

Author: Marking this item as solved since it will be resolved when those folders are merged into the main branch. It will be addressed at https://opslayer.atlassian.net/browse/DRP-40

Network: ./minimal-config.toml
Creds: config

alice: is up
alice: parachain 100 is registered within 225 seconds
alice: parachain 100 block height is at least 10 within 250 seconds

bob: is up
bob: parachain 100 is registered within 225 seconds
bob: parachain 100 block height is at least 10 within 250 seconds

# metrics
alice: reports node_roles is 4
alice: reports sub_libp2p_is_major_syncing is 0

bob: reports node_roles is 4
bob: reports substrate_network_gossip_expired_messages_total is 835

collator01: reports node_roles is 4
collator01: reports substrate_sub_libp2p_listeners_local_addresses is 2
```

> This test scenario checks if the nodes are running, if the parachain with ID 100 is registered within a certain timeframe (255 seconds in this example), and if the parachain block height is at least a certain number within a timeframe (in this case 10 within 255 seconds), and, if the nodes report some metrics. However, you can define any test scenario you want following the [Zombienet DSL](../testing.md) syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This test scenario checks to verify the following:
-  the nodes are running 
- the parachain with ID 100 is registered within a certain timeframe (255 seconds in this example) 
- the parachain block height is at least a certain number within a timeframe (in this case, 10 within 255 seconds)
- the nodes report metrics 
However, you can define any test scenario following the [Zombienet DSL](../testing.md) syntax.
```
Kind of a run-on sentence with 'and' in there multiple times. This is one suggestion for a way to break it up.

---
title: Minimal Example of the Usage of Zombienet
description: This tutorial provides an example of how to use Zombienet to spawn a basic network and run a simple test over it.
---

# A Minimal Example of the Usage of Zombienet

This tutorial provides an example of how to use Zombienet to spawn a basic network and run a simple test against it.

## Prerequisites

To follow this tutorial, first, you need to have Zombienet installed. If you haven't done so, please follow the instructions in the [Installation](../overview.md/#installation){target=_blank} section.

## Defining the Network

As mentioned in the [Configuration Files](../overview.md/#configuration-files){target=_blank} section, Zombienet uses a configuration file to define the ephemeral network that will be spawned. To follow this tutorial, create a file named `minimal-example.toml` with the following content:

```toml
[settings]
timeout = 120

[relaychain]

[[relaychain.nodes]]
name = "alice"
validator = true

[[relaychain.nodes]]
name = "bob"
validator = true

[[parachains]]
id = 100

  [parachains.collator]

>   name = "collator01

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  name = "collator01"
```
This was causing an error for me when I tried to run this

```typescript
import { ApiPromise, WsProvider } from '@polkadot/api';

async function main() {
  const wsProvider = new WsProvider('ws://127.0.0.1:55308');
    const api = await ApiPromise.create({ provider: wsProvider });

    // Retrieve the chain & node information via rpc calls
    const [chain, nodeName, nodeVersion] = await Promise.all([
        api.rpc.system.chain(),
        api.rpc.system.name(),
        api.rpc.system.version()
    ]);

    console.log(`You are connected to chain ${chain} using ${nodeName} v${nodeVersion}`);
}

main().catch(console.error).finally(() => process.exit());
```

Either way allows you to interact easily with the network and its nodes.

### Checking Metrics

You can also check the metrics of the nodes by accessing the provided links listed by the output as `Prometheus Link`. [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/){target=_blank} is a monitoring and alerting toolkit that collects metrics from the nodes. By accessing the provided links, you can see the metrics of the nodes in a web interface.

> ![Prometheus metrics for Bob’s node from the Zombienet test](/polkadot-ecosystem-docs-draft/images/dev-tools/zombienet/tutorials/zombienet-1.webp)

Reviewer: This is unreadable for me without zooming my browser to 150% I'm not sure it adds much to the conversation, but if we are going to keep it, it will need to be zoomed in more for accessibility/readability

Author: Hey @dawnkelly09! Just to be clear, are you saying I should zoom in my browser before taking the screenshot? Thanks!

```bash
tail -f /var/folders/f4/7rdt2m9d7j361dm453cpggbm0000gn/T/zombie-75a01b93c92d571f6198a67bcb380fcd_21724-SEzfCidQ1za4/alice.log
```

After running this command, you will see the logs of the `alice` node in real-time, which can be useful for debugging purposes. The logs of the `bob` and `collator01` nodes can be checked similarly.

## Running a Test

To run a test against the spawned network, you can use the [Zombienet DSL](../testing.md) to define the test scenario. For example, you can create a file named `minimal-example-test.zndsl` with the following content:

```toml
Network: ./minimal-config.toml
Creds: config

alice: is up
alice: parachain 100 is registered within 225 seconds
alice: parachain 100 block height is at least 10 within 250 seconds

bob: is up
bob: parachain 100 is registered within 225 seconds
bob: parachain 100 block height is at least 10 within 250 seconds

# metrics
alice: reports node_roles is 4
alice: reports sub_libp2p_is_major_syncing is 0

bob: reports node_roles is 4
bob: reports substrate_network_gossip_expired_messages_total is 835

collator01: reports node_roles is 4
collator01: reports substrate_sub_libp2p_listeners_local_addresses is 2
```

> This test scenario checks to verify the following:

Reviewer: This is not rendering as a bullet list when I spin it up locally. Please double check the needed line returns are in there, etc. For me it's showing up as a single paragraph with the dashes in where the new bullet line should start.

Author: Sorry @dawnkelly09 , what do you mean by "check if the necessary line breaks are there"? I'm not sure I follow

Anyway, I'm making a small change to simplify this minimal test even further

Reviewer: Sometimes I forget to put a blank line between the sentence and the first item in the bullet list. It makes it all come out as one big sentence with the dashes in it like so: 

"- the nodes are running - the parachain with ID 100 is registered within a certain timeframe (255 seconds in this example) - the parachain block height is at least a certain number within a timeframe (in this case, 10 within 255 seconds)- the nodes report metrics"

So just make sure there is a blank line between the the sentence and the `-the nodes are running`

## Prerequisites

To follow this tutorial, first, you need to have Zombienet installed. If you haven't done so, please follow the instructions in the [Installation](../overview.md/#installation){target=_blank} section.

## Defining the Network

As mentioned in the [Configuration Files](../overview.md/#configuration-files){target=_blank} section, Zombienet uses a configuration file to define the ephemeral network that will be spawned. To follow this tutorial, create a file named `minimal-example.toml` with the following content:

```toml
[settings]
timeout = 120

[relaychain]

[[relaychain.nodes]]
name = "alice"
validator = true

[[relaychain.nodes]]
name = "bob"
validator = true

[[parachains]]
id = 100

  [parachains.collator]
  name = "collator01"
```

This configuration file defines a network with a relaychain with two nodes, `alice` and `bob`, and a parachain with a collator named `collator01`. Also, it sets a timeout of 120 seconds for the network to be ready.

## Running the network

To spawn the network, run the following command:

```bash
zombienet -p native spawn minimal-example.toml
```

> This command will spawn the network defined in the `minimal-example.toml` configuration file. The `-p native` flag specifies that the network will be spawned using the native runtime.

Author: Mmm my bad, should say `native provider`

            <td>collator01</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>Direct Link</th>
            <td><a href="https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=ws://127.0.0.1:55316#explorer">https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=ws://127.0.0.1:55316#explorer</a></td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>Prometheus Link</th>
            <td><a href="http://127.0.0.1:55318/metrics">http://127.0.0.1:55318/metrics</a></td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>Log Cmd</th>
            <td>tail -f /var/folders/f4/7rdt2m9d7j361dm453cpggbm0000gn/T/zombie-75a01b93c92d571f6198a67bcb380fcd_21724-2</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>Parachain ID</th>
            <td>100</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>ChainSpec Path</th>
            <td>/var/folders/f4/7rdt2m9d7j361dm453cpggbm0000gn/T/zombie-75a01b93c92d571f6198a67bcb380fcd_21724-2</td>
        </tr>
    </table>
</div>

!!! note 
    If the IPs and ports are not explicitly defined in the configuration file, they may change each time the network is started, causing the links provided in the output to differ from the example.

## Interacting with the Spawned Network

### Connecting to the Nodes

> After the network is launched, you can interact with it using the [Polkadot.js App](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/){target=_blank}. To do so, open your browser and use the provided links listed by the output as 'direct link'. For instance, in this particular case, as the ports may vary from spawning to spawning, to interact with the `alice` node, open [https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=ws://127.0.0.1:55308#explorer](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=ws://127.0.0.1:55308#explorer){target=_blank} as it is the link provided in the output for the `alice` node. Moreover, you can also do this for the `bob` and `collator01` nodes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the network is launched, you can interact with it using [Polkadot.js Apps](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/){target=\_blank}. To do so, open your browser and use the provided links listed by the output as `Direct Link`. For instance, in this particular case, as the ports may vary from spawning to spawning, to interact with the `alice` node, open [https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=ws://127.0.0.1:55308#explorer](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=ws://127.0.0.1:55308#explorer){target=\_blank} as it is the link provided in the output for the `alice` node. Moreover, you can also do this for the `bob` and `collator01` nodes.
```

for future reference, just make sure to use a backslash in `target=\_blank`

```typescript
import { ApiPromise, WsProvider } from '@polkadot/api';

async function main() {
  const wsProvider = new WsProvider('ws://127.0.0.1:55308');
    const api = await ApiPromise.create({ provider: wsProvider });

    // Retrieve the chain & node information via rpc calls
    const [chain, nodeName, nodeVersion] = await Promise.all([
        api.rpc.system.chain(),
        api.rpc.system.name(),
        api.rpc.system.version()
    ]);

    console.log(`You are connected to chain ${chain} using ${nodeName} v${nodeVersion}`);
}

main().catch(console.error).finally(() => process.exit());
```

Either way allows you to interact easily with the network and its nodes.

### Checking Metrics

You can also check the metrics of the nodes by accessing the provided links listed by the output as `Prometheus Link`. [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/){target=_blank} is a monitoring and alerting toolkit that collects metrics from the nodes. By accessing the provided links, you can see the metrics of the nodes in a web interface. So, for example, the following image shows the Prometheus metrics for Bob’s node from the Zombienet test:

> ![Prometheus metrics for Bob’s node from the Zombienet test](/polkadot-ecosystem-docs-draft/images/dev-tools/zombienet/tutorials/zombienet-tutorials-1.webp)

Reviewer 3: This is kinda small, might need to zoom in a bit more and retake it. Is this a portion of the screen? Will users know what this is when they see it or how to navigate to it?

Author: @eshaben 
This is the view you will see in your browser when you open `Prometheus Link.` The window is long and displays plain metrics. The image is already zoomed in at 175%. Should I zoom in further?

Reviewer 3: Actually, can you just add in the browser window (a dark-themed window like the ones on the [moonbeam docs](https://docs.moonbeam.network/builders/ethereum/dev-env/remix/#add-a-smart-contract-to-the-file-explorer))? It just seems like it'll provide more context, as this looks like it could be terminal output

Wow already at 175? Yeah, I would zoom in a little bit more so it's a bit more readable

Author: Oh, okay, I thought that we intended to hide the URL when taking screenshots. Will do that and also apply a bit more zoom here :)

> ### Checking logs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Checking Logs
```

To check the nodes’ logs, you can use the provided command listed by the output as 'Log Cmd'. For instance, to check the logs of the `alice` node, you can open a new terminal and run the following command:

```bash
tail -f /var/folders/f4/7rdt2m9d7j361dm453cpggbm0000gn/T/zombie-75a01b93c92d571f6198a67bcb380fcd_21724-SEzfCidQ1za4/alice.log
```

> After running this command, you will see the logs of the `alice` node in real-time, which can be useful for debugging purposes. The logs of the `bob` and `collator01` nodes can be checked similarly.

Reviewer 3: Might be nice to provide terminal output here. Feel free to add this in a later PR

Author: Will address this topic in a new PR later on 👍

```toml
Description: Test the basic functionality of the network (minimal example)
Network: ./minimal-config.toml
Creds: config

alice: is up
alice: parachain 100 is registered within 225 seconds
alice: parachain 100 block height is at least 10 within 250 seconds

bob: is up
bob: parachain 100 is registered within 225 seconds
bob: parachain 100 block height is at least 10 within 250 seconds

# metrics
alice: reports node_roles is 4
alice: reports sub_libp2p_is_major_syncing is 0

bob: reports node_roles is 4

collator01: reports node_roles is 4
```

This test scenario checks to verify the following:

- the nodes are running
- the parachain with ID 100 is registered within a certain timeframe (255 seconds in this example)
- the parachain block height is at least a certain number within a timeframe (in this case, 10 within 255 seconds)
- the nodes report metrics 

However, you can define any test scenario following the [Zombienet DSL](../testing.md) syntax.

To run the test, execute the following command:

```bash
zombienet -p native test minimal-example-test.zndsl
```

> This command will execute the test scenario defined in the `minimal-example-test.zndsl` file on the network. If successful, the terminal will display the test output, indicating whether the test passed or failed.

Reviewer 3: Might be nice to provide terminal output here. Feel free to add this in a later PR

Author: Will address this topic in a new PR later on 👍
